README.md, before:

# Amplicon-multi-cutadapt

This repository hosts a snakemake workflow for trimming and QC
of paired-end fastq files. The trimming is done in four steps
using `cutadapt`.

## Installation

Use conda to create and activate the software environment required to start the 
workflow:

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate amp-multi-cut
```

**Note**: If you don't have conda installed, please visit the [conda docs](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html)
for instructions and installation links.

## Running the workflow

This workflow is meant to be downloaded from its Github repository, either by 
cloning or downloading a release tarball from the [release page](https://github.com/biodiversitydata-se/amplicon-multi-cutadapt/releases).

After you've downloaded the workflow (and installed the software environment, see above)
you run the workflow from the root of the amplicon-multi-cutadapt directory
(where this `README.md` file is located). Since this is a Snakemake workflow
you need to run the `snakemake` command from the terminal to start it. 

To try it out in practice you can run the following:

```bash
snakemake --profile test
```

This will run the workflow on a small test dataset (the actual data is under 
`test/data/`). The way that the `--profile` flag works is that it allows you to 
specify a folder containing configuration parameters for snakemake. In this case
it points to the `test/` subdirectory where the file `config.yaml` specifies the 
command line options to use with snakemake.

In addition to the `test` profile, the workflow comes with pre-configured 
profiles for: 
1) running locally on your own computer
2) running on HPC clusters with the SLURM workload manager (_e.g._ the UPPMAX cluster), and
 

To use them you specify `--profile local` and `--profile slurm` respectively. So
if you're running on your local computer simply do:

```bash
snakemake --profile local
```

and if you're running remotely on a SLURM cluster do:

```bash
snakemake --profile slurm
```

### Configuration files

There are a few more configuration parameters you can set that will influence 
how the workflow runs. The default values are specified in the file `config/config.yaml`:

```yaml
# DEFAULT CONFIG PARAMS IN config/config.yaml
cutadapt:
    threads: 16
    expected_read_length: 251
primers:
    forward:
        - "CCHGAYATRGCHTTYCCHCG"
        - "ACCHGAYATRGCHTTYCCHCG"
        - "GACCHGAYATRGCHTTYCCHCG"
        - "TGACCHGAYATRGCHTTYCCHCG"
    reverse:
        - "CDGGRTGNCCRAARAAYCA"
        - "TCDGGRTGNCCRAARAAYCA"
        - "ATCDGGRTGNCCRAARAAYCA"
        - "GATCDGGRTGNCCRAARAAYCA"
data_dir: "data"
sample_list: ""
```

As you can see, these parameters define _e.g._ the primers to use and the 
expected read length for your data. If you need to change these settings you can
either update the `config/config.yaml` file directly, or make a new one and set
your parameters there. Then you need to point snakemake to the new config file 
with `--configfile <path-to-your-config-file>.yaml` on the command line.

### Getting your data into the workflow

The workflow searches for fastq files under a directory specified by 
the `data_dir:` config parameter. By default, this parameter is set to `data/`.
One easy way to integrate your own data is to symlink a data delivery folder inside
`data/`. For instance say you have data delivered to a directory
`/proj/delivery/P00001/`, then you can either symlink that folder into `data/`:

```bash
ln -s /proj/delivery/P00001 data/
```

or you can make a config file (in `yaml` format) that contains:

```yaml
data_dir: /proj/delivery/P00001
```

then run the workflow with `--configfile <path-to-your-config-file>.yaml`

### Sample list (when you have a lot of samples)

If you have **a lot** of samples it can take a long time for the workflow to
locate each R1/R2 input file. This can slow down even so called dry-runs of the 
workflow and make it difficult to work with. In that case you may want to create
a sample list that specifies each sample and the respective R1/R2 file paths so
that the workflow doesn't have to do this search on every instance.

To generate such a sample list first make sure you've set the `data_dir` 
parameter correctly so that it points to a directory containing your data, then
run snakemake with `samples/sample_list.tsv` added to the command. 

Let's try that in practice for the test dataset:

```bash
snakemake --config data_dir=test/data --profile test samples/sample_list.tsv
```

Here we specify `data_dir=test/data` on the command line instead of in a config 
file. This is generally not recommended because config files make it easier to
track what parameters have been used, but for this example it's ok.

The workflow will now locate all the R1/R2 fastq-files under your configured 
`data_dir` path and create a tab-delimited file called `sample_list.tsv` under
the directory `samples/`. Using the `samples/` directory is required at this step,
as is the `.tsv` suffix, but otherwise you can name the file anything you like, 
so _e.g._ `snakemake --profile test samples/my-sample-list.tsv` will also work.

Note that if you're using a separate configuration file you have to update the 
snakemake call above to include `--configfile <path-to-your-configfile>`.

You only have to generate this sample list once, and then you can make the 
workflow use the sample list by updating your configuration file with:

```yaml
sample_list: samples/sample_list.tsv
```

Commit message:

Add explanation of cutadapt steps

README.md, after:

# Amplicon-multi-cutadapt

This repository hosts a snakemake workflow for trimming and QC
of paired-end fastq files. The trimming is done in four steps
using `cutadapt`.

## Installation

Use conda to create and activate the software environment required to start the 
workflow:

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate amp-multi-cut
```

**Note**: If you don't have conda installed, please visit the [conda docs](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html)
for instructions and installation links.

## Running the workflow

This workflow is meant to be downloaded from its Github repository, either by 
cloning or downloading a release tarball from the [release page](https://github.com/biodiversitydata-se/amplicon-multi-cutadapt/releases).

After you've downloaded the workflow (and installed the software environment, see above)
you run the workflow from the root of the amplicon-multi-cutadapt directory
(where this `README.md` file is located). Since this is a Snakemake workflow
you need to run the `snakemake` command from the terminal to start it. 

To try it out in practice you can run the following:

```bash
snakemake --profile test
```

This will run the workflow on a small test dataset (the actual data is under 
`test/data/`). The way that the `--profile` flag works is that it allows you to 
specify a folder containing configuration parameters for snakemake. In this case
it points to the `test/` subdirectory where the file `config.yaml` specifies the 
command line options to use with snakemake.

In addition to the `test` profile, the workflow comes with pre-configured 
profiles for: 
1) running locally on your own computer
2) running on HPC clusters with the SLURM workload manager (_e.g._ the UPPMAX cluster)
 

To use them you specify `--profile local` and `--profile slurm` respectively. So
if you're running on your local computer simply do:

```bash
snakemake --profile local
```

and if you're running remotely on a SLURM cluster do:

```bash
snakemake --profile slurm
```

### Configuration files

There are a few more configuration parameters you can set that will influence 
how the workflow runs. The default values are specified in the file `config/config.yaml`:

```yaml
# DEFAULT CONFIG PARAMS IN config/config.yaml
cutadapt:
    threads: 16
    expected_read_length: 251
primers:
    forward:
        - "CCHGAYATRGCHTTYCCHCG"
        - "ACCHGAYATRGCHTTYCCHCG"
        - "GACCHGAYATRGCHTTYCCHCG"
        - "TGACCHGAYATRGCHTTYCCHCG"
    reverse:
        - "CDGGRTGNCCRAARAAYCA"
        - "TCDGGRTGNCCRAARAAYCA"
        - "ATCDGGRTGNCCRAARAAYCA"
        - "GATCDGGRTGNCCRAARAAYCA"
data_dir: "data"
sample_list: ""
```

As you can see, these parameters define _e.g._ the primers to use and the 
expected read length for your data. If you need to change these settings you can
either update the `config/config.yaml` file directly, or make a new one and set
your parameters there. Then you need to point snakemake to the new config file 
with `--configfile <path-to-your-config-file>.yaml` on the command line.

### Getting your data into the workflow

The workflow searches for fastq files under a directory specified by 
the `data_dir:` config parameter. By default, this parameter is set to `data/`.
One easy way to integrate your own data is to symlink a data delivery folder inside
`data/`. For instance say you have data delivered to a directory
`/proj/delivery/P00001/`, then you can either symlink that folder into `data/`:

```bash
ln -s /proj/delivery/P00001 data/
```

or you can make a config file (in `yaml` format) that contains:

```yaml
data_dir: /proj/delivery/P00001
```

then run the workflow with `--configfile <path-to-your-config-file>.yaml`

### Sample list (when you have a lot of samples)

If you have **a lot** of samples it can take a long time for the workflow to
locate each R1/R2 input file. This can slow down even so called dry-runs of the 
workflow and make it difficult to work with. In that case you may want to create
a sample list that specifies each sample and the respective R1/R2 file paths so
that the workflow doesn't have to do this search on every instance.

To generate such a sample list first make sure you've set the `data_dir` 
parameter correctly so that it points to a directory containing your data, then
run snakemake with `samples/sample_list.tsv` added to the command. 

Let's try that in practice for the test dataset:

```bash
snakemake --config data_dir=test/data --profile test samples/sample_list.tsv
```

Here we specify `data_dir=test/data` on the command line instead of in a config 
file. This is generally not recommended because config files make it easier to
track what parameters have been used, but for this example it's ok.

The workflow will now locate all the R1/R2 fastq-files under your configured 
`data_dir` path and create a tab-delimited file called `sample_list.tsv` under
the directory `samples/`. Using the `samples/` directory is required at this step,
as is the `.tsv` suffix, but otherwise you can name the file anything you like, 
so _e.g._ `snakemake --profile test samples/my-sample-list.tsv` will also work.

Note that if you're using a separate configuration file you have to update the 
snakemake call above to include `--configfile <path-to-your-configfile>`.

You only have to generate this sample list once, and then you can make the 
workflow use the sample list by updating your configuration file with:

```yaml
sample_list: samples/sample_list.tsv
```

## Explanation of the cutadapt steps

The workflow processes fastq files in four consecutive `cutadapt` steps:

1. Discard all reads with the Illumina TruSeq adapters in either the 5' and 3'  
   end of sequences. 
2. Search for and trim primer sequences from the start of reads in R1 and R2
   files using forward and reverse primers, respectively. Remove any untrimmed 
   read. This step is done with additional settings `--no-indels` and `-e 0` in 
   order to only accept perfect matches.
3. Discard any remaining reads that still contain primer sequences.
4. Trim reads to a fixed length. This length is calculated by subtracting the 
   length of the longest primer from the read length defined by the `expected_read_length:`
   parameter under the `cutadapt:` section in the config file (default value is 251).
